foreign
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is Dr Mark eatonson I'm a
specialist in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and related
issues and also author of the book
unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding The Narcissist in your
life the book is a Hands-On guide to
understanding the psychology of
narcissism from a compassionate
perspective and it's available at Major
book retailers
so today I'd like to discuss resiliency
you know normally when we talk about
mental illness and particularly
personality disorders like NPD we focus
exclusively on what's going wrong we
talk about deficits you know what's
missing in the person's psychology and
we talk about pathologies in other words
what's present but disordered or
maladaptive we rarely focus on the
positives we seldom discuss personality
disorders in terms of resiliency
and I think that does a disservice to
individuals who struggle with these
issues because each individual
psychology is actually a story of
resiliency and I think it's important to
talk about those resiliencies to
understand and appreciate how the person
made the best of a bad situation
how they learn through trial and error
to take care of themselves and make up
for what was missing in their early care
environment how they developed defenses
to survive abuse how they grew and
persisted despite adversity or neglect
maladaptive traits in a personality are
often the individual's best attempt to
adapt and overcome
to survive emotionally and
psychologically
and this is one of the things that I
find so compelling about human
psychology and really about living
things in general to quote the character
of Ian Malcolm from the movie Jurassic
Park
life finds a way
now when I was applying to graduate
school a quote by the American
psychologist Carl Rogers was very
helpful to me in defining my perspective
on human psychology I'm going to read it
in its entirety here because I think he
says it much better than I ever could
whether we're speaking of a flower or an
oak tree of an earthworm or a beautiful
bird of an ape or a person
we will do well I believe to recognize
that life is an active process not a
passive one
whether the stimulus arises from within
or without
whether the environment is favorable or
unfavorable
the behaviors of an organism can be
counted on to be in the direction of
maintaining enhancing and reproducing
itself
this is the very nature of the process
we call life
this tendency is operative at all times
indeed only the presence or absence of
this total directional process enables
us to tell whether a given organism is
alive or dead the actualizing tendency
can of course be thwarted or warped but
it cannot be destroyed without
destroying the organism
I remember that in my Boyhood the bin in
which we stored our winter supply of
potatoes was in the basement several
feet below a small window
the conditions were unfavorable
but the potatoes would begin to sprout
pale white Sprouts so unlike the Healthy
Green shoots they send up when planted
in the soil in the spring
but these sad spindly Sprouts would grow
two or three feet in length as they
reached toward the distant light of the
window
the Sprouts were in their bizarre futile
growth a sort of desperate expression of
the directional tendency I have been
describing
they would never become plants never
mature never fulfill their real
potential but under the most adverse
circumstances they were striving to
become
life would not give up even if it could
not flourish in dealing with clients
whose lives have been terribly warped in
working with men and women on the back
Wards of State hospitals I often think
of those potato Sprouts so unfavorable
have been the conditions in which these
people have developed that their lives
often seem abnormal Twisted scarcely
human
yet the directional tendency in them can
be trusted
the clue to understanding their behavior
is that they are striving and the only
ways that they perceive as available to
them to move toward growth toward
becoming
to healthy persons the result may seem
bizarre and futile
but they are life's desperate attempt to
become itself
end quote
so just let that sink in for a moment
the clue to understanding their behavior
is that they are striving and the only
ways that they perceive as available to
them to move toward growth
and in my mind this is the single most
valuable Concept in all of psychology
and when viewed through this lens no
behavior however maladaptive it may seem
on the surface is completely outside the
reach of compassion empathy and
understanding
I'm not saying that we need to condone
or accept behaviors that are harmful or
hurtful toward other people but at their
base all behaviors no matter how messed
up they may appear to healthy
individuals are actually an attempt to
survive so how does all of this apply to
narcissism and to NPD
well they've often said that NPD is a
disorder caused by deficits in the self
and the presence of maladaptive
strategies that are used to compensate
for those deficits
where there are gaps in the structure of
the self the individual learns to
compensate by filling in those gaps with
whatever they can use imagine going on a
backpacking trip and discovering after a
Long Day's hike Into the Wilderness that
you forgot to pack a tent and it's
starting to rain
what do you do
there's a deficit you don't have a tent
so you improvise you start to gather
whatever's available sticks leaves rocks
you repurpose what's already in your
pack clothes string shoelaces you make
do is it pretty probably not but it
might just make the difference between
dying of exposure on a Mountaintop and
living to see the sun rise the next
morning
people with narcissistic vulnerabilities
used whatever they could find to build a
shelter from the elements a place inside
of themselves where they could live a
self
and in the absence of proper materials
to build a self like consistent empathic
mirroring and Attunement from caregivers
parental warmth and genuine engagement
and connection positive peer affiliation
and inclusion
they may do with sticks strings and
t-shirts they found aspects of the
environment like big boulders
outcroppings and caves things that
weren't meant to be a shelter
and they repurposed them in order to
survive NPD is the legacy of such
makeshift survival tactics
except what worked well enough to get
through the storms of childhood doesn't
work well enough to survive and thrive
in adult relationships it doesn't work
well enough to weather the complexities
of adult life healthy grown-ups need to
be able to contend with ambiguities
they need to be flexible in
understanding of their own limitations
and the limitations of others they need
to have a stable foundation in order to
build a life
sticks leaves and string won't cut it
even the best cave is still a cave and
it leaves the person inside exposed to
the cold even if they're able to stay
dry but despite these shortcomings it's
so important to appreciate the strength
and resiliency that allowed the
individual to survive in the first place
so if you identify as a person who
struggles with narcissism or NPD take a
moment to Marvel at your own resiliency
recognize that you are so much more than
deficits and pathologies
you're a living breathing person and
you're here today listening to this
because you found a way to survive
battered and bruised though you may be
never forget this indisputable fact
just as it's important to grieve the
parts of the self that maybe never grew
or never developed it's crucial to
celebrate your status as a survivor of
whatever adversity you faced and believe
me if you identify as someone with NPD
then you faced adversity
even if you don't remember it or can't
identify what it was individuals with
NPD like those with other personality
disorders often have something called
identity diffusion that means they have
difficulty representing their own
experiences to themselves
a process that's also called mentalizing
and people with narcissistic personality
Styles often also have an avoidant
attachment style which causes them to
forget negative experiences or sort of
gloss over their childhood it's not
uncommon to hear people with avoidant
attachment Styles say things like my
childhood was great but without any
detail or the ability to recollect what
about it was actually quote great
this attachment style is actually
protective in nature because it serves
to reduce the amount of subjective
distress that the person feels and they
learn over time to focus instead on the
positive or to dissociate themselves in
times of difficulty or distress and this
serves to avoid activating their need
for Comfort Safety and Security because
they grew up in an environment where
Comfort Safety and Security weren't
forthcoming it's a legacy of early
emotional neglect
so whatever your story congratulations
you survived
never forget that
allow that to be the foundation for your
future work
whatever life throws your way your
status as a Survivor is already
established
as Carl Rogers said
you are striving to become
okay so that's it for today please leave
questions or comments and until next
time take good care
foreign
[Music]